---
layout: post
title: "Understanding Volatile in C"
date: 2014-05-15 01:19:00
categories: Programming English
permalink: /posts/understanding-volatile-in-c
discourse: 12
---

When doing project 3 of CS140, we run into a very interesting problem. We want to deference a pointer to see if we can read from / write to that address in order to check the validity of user pointer in the system call handler.

One simple way we came up is:

```c
*vaddr;
```

However, this won't work. I think the reason why this trick won't work is that the compiler is clever enough to optimize this line.

I fire up vim and deference a NULL pointer in C and write:

```c
int *ptr = NULL;
*ptr;
```

It just won't segfault. So I change it to:

```c
int *ptr = NULL;
*ptr = 1;
```

it will cause segmentation fault. However, if we only want to read-only address, this method doesn't work because it will write to the memory address.

Maybe we must use the value of vaddr and it must have some side effects. We try the following:

```c
printf ("%d\n", *(int *)vaddr);
```

It works but it prints out a lot of messy information. If ```vaddr``` is invalid, it will trigger a page fault. However, it will print out unnecessary debug information.

After asking Haozhun for help, he said that we can use ```volatile``` to solve the problem. To check if an user pointer points to a readable region, we can use the following code snippet:

```c
volatile int *va = (volatile int *)vaddr;
*va;
```

```volatile``` tells compiler not to optimize it. It is a very clever trick. ```volatile``` prevents compiler from optimizing it because other parts of the system could change the value of it.

To check if the user pointer points to a writable region, we can do it by:

```c
volatile int *va = (volatile int *)vaddr;
int tmp = *va;
*va = 1;
*va = tmp;
```
